---
title: 'Stakeholder Inclusion - The Power of Speech Bubbles'
category: 'Inclusive co-creation, Feel the Need, Change Makers, Leadership, Inclusive Culture'
slug: 'Power of Speech Bubbles'
post_date: 2020-08-27
excerpt: "Stakeholder inclusion and the voices of 'the people it's about' are important in any kind of development and change processes. The question is how do we do this?"
thumbnail: /images/uploads/speech.png
authors: 'Tinna C. Nielsen'
---

Stakeholder inclusion and the voices of 'the people it's about' are
important in any kind of development and change processes. The
question is how do we do this? Do we just put these people in front of
decision makers and hope they listen well enough to include all these
diverse insights into the process? This is an example of how you can
do it by applying behavioural design and nudge people to listen and
include.

**The people it's about**

An international wave of efforts to foster civic engagement and
facilitate citizen participatory development has emerged over the past
decades. Similarly, there has been increased attention and efforts to
create more inclusive organisations and workplaces and empower employees
to contribute to innovation in both in public and private sector
organisations. The evidence is clear; the outcomes are more inclusive
for the greater good of people, planet, business, and economy when the
process is inclusive and empowering. [A recent
study](https://www.accenture.com/_acnmedia/PDF-115/Accenture-DAVOS-Responsible-Leadership-Report.pdf#zoom=40)
found that stakeholder inclusion is the number one critical trait of
responsible leadership needed in today's world. The saying *'Nothing
about us without us'* seems to finally be taken seriously. But the
question is: are we getting this right?

As an anthropologist specialised in inclusive development processes as a
means to foster inclusive communities, workplaces, cities, public
policies, and societies, I experience again and again how '*the people
it's about'* do not feel listened to nor included in find the best
solutions, despite the good intentions to actually include them by those
having the mandate to initiate changes that would affect the lives or
work of 'the people'. This is in spite of the fact that the common
narrative in these organisations and the self-perception of the staff is
that of 'including the people' in finding the best solutions and
developing their own communities. There is very often a gap between the
perceived reality (by the professionals) and the experienced reality (by
the people it's about).

This gap was framed in a powerful statement by a refugee I met last year
when I was in the [Kakuma refugee camp working with young
entrepreneurs](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=aSiy8WsscFE) (as part of
a [World Economic Forum initiative by the Young Global Leaders
community](https://www.weforum.org/our-impact/fostering-entrepreneurship-connects-refugees-with-global-economy)
in collaboration with UNHCR and Oxford University). I asked them if they
ever got frustrated with all the delegations visiting the camp. All the
replies can be distilled to this, "*No, that is not frustrating, that is
just part of everyday life in the camp*". But what frustrated them was
that "*They hear us, but don't listen*". They felt this even though the
intentions of the humanitarian aid workers and the visiting delegations
was to actually include them. This gap is not an issue for only
refugees. This happens worldwide and in all sectors, communities, public
service, schools, workplaces. How can we close this gap by having
greater inclusion of all stakeholders?

How can you actually give people a voice and make other people listen?
How can we make sure the diversity of all these lived experiences and
diverse insights does not get reduced to a number in a spreadsheet? And
what if it is not an option for people to meet in person and talk? Here
is one way you can do it. It's called The Speech Bubble Inclusion Nudge.
I designed it in 2012 and it has since been used by change makers around
the world.

**The Speech Bubble Inclusion Nudge**

In a global organisation where I use to work, the annual employee survey
showed an increased number of employees experiencing unacceptable
behaviour (bullying, discrimination, harassment). The managers and
leaders saw the numbers and knew ([with their rational mind](/blog/about-inclusion-nudges/power-of-inclusion-nudges/)) that changes
needed to happen, but they had not taken action (which happen in the
unconscious mind).

The challenge I often faced as a change maker when presenting this kind
of 'unpleasant' data and reality, was that many leaders would rationally
try to deal with this by discussing the legal definition of harassment,
discrimination, etc., and in this way distance themselves from the
issue. Often someone would conclude that many of the experiences of the
employees would not fit this legal definition, and that some people
"*are just too sensitive*". Typically, I would get shot as the messenger
instead of the issue being discussed. This would get us nowhere. I
needed to avoid these kinds of reactions.

So, I designed The Speech Bubble Inclusion Nudges based on behavioural
insights to target the behavioural drivers in the [unconscious mind
(system 1)](/blog/about-inclusion-nudges/power-of-inclusion-nudges/) to motivate and enable the leaders to take action.

**This is what we did**

Together with some colleagues, I collected personal stories and examples
of staff having experienced unacceptable behaviour in this organisation.
We wrote all their stories in first person quotes (anonymised). We
printed the examples in speech bubbles and covered the walls of the
leadership meeting room from floor to ceiling, giving a voice to people
who never felt heard when speaking up or who did not dare to speak up.
As the leaders entered the meeting room, we said *"Your people have
something to tell you"* and we invited the leaders to walk around and
read *"the experiences of* *your* \[company name*\] colleagues and
employees"*.

We also humanised the numbers. Instead of talking about 15% of
employees, we wrote on a big poster "*15% = 4935 people. That is 4935*
\[company name*\] colleagues".* Furthermore, we reversed the business
case, focusing on the losses. This was based on research findings from
other organisations to which we had access at the time, showing that a
person experiencing this kind of unacceptable behaviour over a long
period loses 30% of their decision-making ability. When one person in a
team of 8 people experiences this, it has a negative spill over on the
productivity of the entire team. Productivity of the team drops by
12.5%.

**An eye-opener and grateful reaction**

I remember well the first couple of times we facilitated this
intervention with executives and top leaders and it still gives me the
shivers. The silence was palpable as they were reading. We hoped they
would read at least 4-5 examples. Actually, they read all of them. When
the leaders started speaking with each other, they were expressing
emotions (which rarely happened in this organisation -- the social norm
was 'be assertive'). They were whispering as they expressed feelings
such as anger, surprise, sadness, shame, disappointment, disgust. They
said, "*I feel disgusted that this is going on in our workplace*", "*I
feel so sad*", "*How can this be going on right in front of us, without
us knowing*?", "*I feel nauseous, I can't read any more*", "*These are
my colleagues and I feel ashamed that I didn't know what they go
through*", and "*I actually think, I said some of that myself*".

With this intervention, the discussion changed. Passive and reluctant
behaviour changed to active and engaging behaviour. Normally, they would
have delegated the task to the HR department to create a new policy and
get global compliance. After the Speech Bubble intervention, it was
different. They were grateful for experiencing this and realising what
was going on. The leaders took action themselves. They did not need a
new policy and long action plan. They suggested several simple actions
they could take themselves immediately. Within 10 minutes, we had
co-created a plan for how to involve the entire community of managers
and employees globally in the organisation. One leader said, "*The other
leaders need to experience this, we can't tell them this, they need to
feel what we felt. Let's send this on a tour, so the others can
experience this as well".* He had captured the very essence and purpose
of this intervention in one sentence. He intuitively knew [the importance
of '*feeling* *the need'* to change this problem instead of having a
rational understanding](/blog/about-inclusion-nudges/power-of-inclusion-nudges/). They also made a decision immediately to add the
issue of a 'mentally safe work environment' on the agenda together with
a 'physically safe work environment' (this was an already existing topic
on the agenda -- it was a manufacturing company) of every weekly
leadership team meeting in the entire global organisation.

The intervention toured internally and many people in the organisation
listened to the voices of their colleagues, and realised issues they
were blind to. It led to local initiatives emerging and many managers
and leaders involved the employees in creating solutions to foster the
needed changes for a more inclusive workplace culture. After all they
were 'the people it's about'.

**How can speech bubbles be so powerful?**

This motivates people not only to listen but to engage in making change
happen because it appeals to [system 1 in the brain](/blog/about-inclusion-nudges/power-of-inclusion-nudges/). It also motivates to
co-create solutions with 'the people it's about'. Getting stakeholder
inclusion right is about making the unconscious mind* feel the need* to
be inclusive and *feel the need* to take action. This is also a proven
way to motivate people to be allies for diversity, equity, and
inclusion.

Several insights from behavioural and social sciences were applied in
the design of The Speech Bubble Inclusion Nudge to influence the
unconscious mind in multiple ways.

**Why it works -- the behavioural insights**

**Activate tribal mentality:** The first sentence "*Your
colleagues/employees have something to tell you*" is designed to trigger
the tribal mentality of "*this is my tribe*" and "*I am their leader --
I am supposed to protect my tribe*". The effect of triggering our
tribalism towards our in-group is emotional engagement. We listen more
closely to our tribe members.

**Change the messenger:** This intervention changed the messenger from
being the 'facilitator' to being 'the people'. The messenger powerfully
influences our behaviour and when our peers are the messenger it often
has a bigger influence on what we do, how we listen, and what we
hear.[^1]

**Trigger empathy and pain:** Experiencing other people being treated
badly, being discriminated against, and being socially excluded triggers
the area of the brain where physical pain and empathy are located. This
happens even when we're not directly experiencing it ourselves and it
motivates us to want to change this.[^2]

**Humanise the numbers:** Numbers and data are communicated to the
rational mind (system 2) but it is system 1 that is controlling our
behaviour. Numbers do not motivate system 1 to take action. Emotional
reactions do. So, it is important to humanise the numbers. The 'visual
voices' do that, combined with the conversion of percentages into the
actual number of people with an identity (the organisation's name). This
activates the feeling of a social bond with 'similar others'.

**Loss-aversion bias:** This is triggered by being confronted with
losses, such as loss of staff's decision-making ability and team
productivity, or the threat of losing image as professional leaders (by
not having taken action to change this)*.* The pain of losing is
psychologically about twice as powerful as the pleasure of gaining.[^3]
The basic principle of loss aversion can explain why penalty framing
(losing money, performance, business, etc) is sometimes more effective
than reward framing in motivating people.[^4] Reversing the business
case in this intervention proved to be motivational.

The strength of this approach is that it motivates a person to take
action even when they know they can't control the outcome. It empowers
'the people it's about' to apply their diverse insights and ideas in
joint effort with peers and they all own the solutions. Another strength
is that the people often realise that they themselves are as much a part
of the problem as 'the others', which in many cases has led to
mitigation of the feeling of 'us' and 'them', the attribution error
bias, and fosters social cohesion and a more inclusive culture.

This design has since been used in urban development, multinationals,
public services, and humanitarian organisations to address issues such
as reducing conflict between clans in a refugee camp, loneliness at
work, and engaging residents in city development.

**Keep listening to 'the people' in the entire process**

This intervention addresses several challenges in getting stakeholder
inclusion right because when it comes to inclusive co-creating, we need
access to diverse perspectives and also to the people who often don't
have a voice. Some do not have the opportunity to share their
experiences or perspectives on an issue. People in vulnerable situations
are often left out or sometimes are not even invited. Also, it can be
sometimes too much or too risky to participate. An intervention like
this includes them indirectly, making sure their voices are collected
(e.g. in their homes, on the streets, in workplaces, or elsewhere) and
shared and listened to.

Another challenge is that people, both in privileged positions and
non-privileged positions, may find it difficult to grasp each other's
problems (due to in-group and out-groups, as well as ethnocentrism).
They need real examples of the lived reality of the other people to
improve their ability to be open minded in co-creation.

Another challenge is how to make sure people listen. Also, how to ensure
they keep a focus on 'the people it's about' throughout the entire
development and decision-making process. This is important even when
those people are not physically part of the process. When people are out
of sight, they are often out of mind. With this intervention, the voices
of 'the people' are made visible throughout the process and all the
time. They are present and insisting on attention.

Another challenge is that the diversity of perspectives that
characterises 'the people it's about' often gets lost in transition.
Facilitators of stakeholder inclusion in participatory and co-creation
processes often have to hand over and/or communicate the insights to
decision-makers, politicians, entrepreneurs, etc. who will decide what
happens next, and what kind of resources to allocate. 'The people it's
about' are often turned into numbers, percentages, graphs, statistics,
and spreadsheets in the handover, meaning that the communication is to
the rational mind (system 2) instead of the unconscious mind (system 1).
These stakeholders also need to feel empathy for 'the people it's about'
in order to make choices that benefit both people, organisation,
community, and budget and not just the latter, as is too often the case
in decision-making.

My experience is that a behavioural design as simple as this can
mitigate all these challenges, and close the gap between the two systems
in the mind, and the gap between the perceived reality (by the
professionals) and the experienced reality (by the people it's about).
At the same time, it empowers people to take joint action and be allies
for making inclusion the norm everywhere, for everyone.

I hope you will give it a try!

*You can learn more about the details of how to design and facilitate
your version of the Speech Bubble Intervention in the Action Guide for
Motivating Allies and The Inclusion Nudges Guidebook.
www.inclusion-nudges.org*

[^1]: **MINDSPACE: INFLUENCING BEHAVIOUR THROUGH PUBLIC POLICY.** P.
    Dolan, M. Hallsworth, D. Halpern, D. King, & I. Vlaev, 2010

[^2]: **EMPATHY FOR SOCIAL EXCLUSION INVOLVES THE SENSORY-DISCRIMINATIVE
    COMPONENT OF PAIN: A WITHIN-SUBJECT FMRI STUDY**. G. Novembre, M.
    Zanon, & G. Silani, SCAN, vol 10, pgs 153-164, 2015

[^3]: **JUDGEMENT UNDER UNCERTAINTY: HEURISTICS AND BIASES**. Amos
    Tversky & Daniel Kahneman, Judgement Under Uncertainty: Heuristics
    and Biases. *Science, *vol. 185, no 4157, pgs 1124-1131, 27
    September 1974

[^4]: **ARE EXPERIMENTAL ECONOMISTS PRONE TO FRAMING EFFECTS? A NATURAL
    FIELD EXPERIMENT.** S. Gächter, H. Orzen, E. Renner, & C. Starmer,
    Journal of Economic Behavior & Organization, vol 70, pgs 443-446,
    2009

